   Network Access to Multimedia Information - Summary
                            
Introduction

This document is a summary of a report entitled "Network
Access to Multimedia Information", by Chris Adie.  The
full report is available at URL
ftp://ftp.ed.ac.uk/pub/mmaccess.  The report and this
summary are Copyright  1993 RARE.  The full report
contains a disclaimer which also applies to this summary.

The report is concerned with issues in the intersection
of networked information retrieval, database and
multimedia technologies.  It aims to establish research
and academic user requirements for network access to
multimedia data, to look at existing systems which offer
partial solutions, and to identify what needs to be done
to satisfy the most pressing requirements.

User Requirements

There are a number of reasons why multimedia data may
need to be accessed remotely (as opposed to physically
distributing the data, eg on CD-ROM).  These reasons
centre on the cost of physical distribution, versus the
timeliness of network distribution.  Of course, there is
a cost associated with network distribution, but this
tends to be hidden from the end user.

User requirements have been determined by studying
existing and proposed projects involving networked
multimedia data.  It has proved convenient to divide the
applications into four classes according to their
requirements: multimedia database applications, academic
(particularly scientific) publishing applications, cal
(computer-aided learning), and general multimedia
information services.

Database applications typically involve large collections
of monomedia (non-text) data with associated textual and
numeric fields.  They require a range of search and
retrieval techniques.

Publishing applications require a range of media types,
hyperlinking, and the capability to access the same data
using different access paradigms (search, browse,
hierarchical, links).  Authentication and charging
facilities are required.

Cal applications require sophisticated presentation and
synchronisation capabilities, of the type found in
existing multimedia authoring tools.  Authentication and
monitoring facilities are required.

General multimedia information services include on-line
documentation, campus-wide information systems, and other
systems which don't conveniently fall into the preceding
categories.  Hyperlinking is perhaps the most common
requirement in this area.

The analysis of these application areas allows a number
of important user requirements to be identified:

  Support for the Apple Macintosh, UNIX and PC/MS Windows
  environments.
  
  Support for a wide range of media types - text, image,
  graphics and application-specific media being most
  important, followed by video and sound.
  
  Support for hyperlinking, and for multiple access
  structures to be built on the same underlying data.
  
  Support for sophisticated synchronisation and
  presentation facilities.
  
  Support for a range of database searching techniques.
  
  Support for user annotation of information, and for
  user-controlled display of sequenced media.
  
  Adequate responsiveness - the maximum time taken to
  retrieve a node should not exceed 20s.
  
  Support for user authentication, a charging mechanism,
  and monitoring facilities.
  
  The ability to execute scripts.
  
  Support for mail-based access to multimedia documents,
  and (where appropriate) for printing multimedia
  documents.
  
  Powerful, easy-to-use authoring tools.
  
Existing Systems

The main information retrieval systems in use on the
Internet are Gopher, Wais, and the World-Wide Web.  All
work on a client-server paradigm, and all provide some
degree of support for multimedia data.

Gopher presents the user with a hierarchical arrangement
of nodes which are either directories (menus), leaf nodes
(documents containing text or other media types), or
search nodes (allowing some set of documents to be
searched using keywords, possibly using WAIS).  A range
of media types is supported.  Extensions currently being
developed for Gopher (Gopher+) provide better support for
multimedia data.  Gopher has a very high penetration
(there are over 1000 Gopher servers on the Internet), but
it does not provide hyperlinks and is inflexibly
hierarchical.

Wais (Wide Area Information Server) allows users to
search for documents in remote databases.  Full-text
indexing of the databases allows all documents containing
particular (combinations of) words to be identified and
retrieved.  Non-text data (principally image data) can be
handled, but indexing such documents is only performed on
the document file name, severely limiting its usefulness.
However, WAIS is ideally suited to text search
applications.

World-Wide Web (WWW) is a large-scale distributed
hypermedia system.  The Web consists of nodes (also
called documents) and links.  Links are connections
between documents: to follow a link, the user clicks on a
highlighted word in the source document, which causes the
linked-to document to be retrieved and displayed.  A
document can be one of a variety of media types, or it
can be a search node in a similar sense to Gopher.  The
WWW addressing method means that WAIS and Gopher servers
may also be accessed from (indeed, form part of) the Web.
WWW has a smaller penetration than Gopher, but is growing
faster.  The Web technology is currently being revised to
take better account of the needs of multimedia
information.

These systems all go some way to meet the user
requirements.

  Support for multiple platforms and for a wide range of
  media types (through "viewer" software external to the
  client program) is good.
  
  Only WWW has hyperlinks.
  
  There is little or no support for sophisticated
  presentation and synchronisation requirements.
  
  Support for database querying tends to be limited to
  "keyword" searches, but current developments in Gopher
  and WWW should make more sophisticated queries
  possible.
  
  Some clients support user annotation of documents.
  
  Response times for all three systems vary substantially
  depending on the network distance between client and
  server, and there is no support for isochronous data
  transfer.
  
  There is little in the way of authentication, charging
  and monitoring facilities, although these are planned
  for WWW.
  
  Scripting is not supported because of security issues
  
  WWW supports a mail responder.
  
  The only system sufficiently complex to warrant an
  authoring tool is WWW, which has editors to support its
  hypertext markup language.
  
Research

There are a number of research projects which are of
significant interest.

Hyper-G is an ambitious distributed hypermedia research
project at the University of Graz.  It combines concepts
of hypermedia, information retrieval systems and
documentation systems with aspects of communication and
collaboration, and computer-supported teaching and
learning.  Automatic generation of hyperlinks is
supported, and there is a concept of generic structures
which can exist in parallel with the hyperlink structure.
Hyper-G is based on UNIX, and is in use as a CWIS at
Graz.  Gateways between Hyper-G and WWW exist.

Microcosm is a PC-based hypermedia system developed at
the University of Southampton.  It can be viewed as an
integrating hypermedia framework - a layer on top of a
range of existing applications which enables
relationships between different documents to be
established.  Hyperlinks are maintained separately from
the data.  Networking support for Microcosm is currently
under development, as are versions of Microcosm for the
Apple Macintosh and for UNIX.  Microcosm is currently
being "commercialised".

AthenaMuse 2 is an ambitious distributed hypermedia
authoring and presentation system under development by a
university/industry consortium based at MIT.  It will
have good facilities for presentation and synchronisation
of multimedia data, strong authoring support, and will
include support for networking isochronous data.  It will
be a commercial product.  Initial versions will support
UNIX and X windows, with a PC/MS Windows version
following.  Apple Macintosh support has lower priority.

The "Xanadu" project is designing and building an "open,
social hypermedia" distributed environment, but shows no
sign of delivering anything after several years of work.

The European Commission sponsors a number of peripherally
relevant projects through its Esprit and RACE research
programmes.  These programmes tend to be oriented towards
commercial markets, and are thus not directly relevant.
An exception is the Esprit IDOMENEUS project, which
brings together workers in the database, information
retrieval and multimedia fields.  It is recommended that
RARE establish a liaison with this project.

There are a variety of other academic and commercial
research projects which are also of interest.  None of
them are as directly relevant as those outlined above.

Standards

There are a number of existing and emerging standards for
structuring hypermedia applications.  Of these, the most
important are SGML, HyTime, MHEG, ODA, PREMO and Acrobat.
All bar the last are de jure standards, while Acrobat is
a commercial product which is being proposed as a de
facto standard.

SGML (Standard Generalized Markup Language) is a markup
language for delimiting the logical and semantic content
of text documents.  Because of its flexibility, it has
become an important tool in hypermedia systems.  HyTime
is an ISO standardised infrastructure for representing
integrated, open hypermedia documents, and is based on
SGML.  HyTime has great expressive power, but is not
optimised for run-time efficiency.  It is recommended
that future RARE work on networked hypermedia should take
account of the importance of SGML and HyTime.

MHEG (Multimedia and Hypermedia information coding
Experts Group) is a draft ISO standard for representing
hypermedia applications in a platform-independent form.
It uses an object-oriented approach, and is optimised for
run-time efficiency.  Full IS status for MHEG is expected
in 1994.  It is recommended that RARE keep a watching
brief on MHEG.

The ODA (Open Document Architecture) standard is being
enhanced to incorporate multimedia and hypermedia
features.  However, interest in ODA is perceived to be
decreasing, and it is recommended that ODA should not
form a basis for further RARE work in networked
hypermedia.

PREMO is a new work item in the ISO graphics
standardisation community, which appears to overlap with
MHEG and HyTime.  It is not clear that the PREMO work,
which is at a very early stage, is worthwhile in view of
the existence of those standards.

Acrobat PDF is a format for representing multimedia
(printable) documents in a portable, revisable form.  It
is based on Postscript, and is being proposed by Adobe
Inc (originators of Postscript) as an industry standard.
RARE should maintain awareness of this technology in view
of its potential impact on multimedia information
systems.

There are various standards which have relevance to the
way multimedia data is accessed across the network.  Many
of these have been described in a previous report
[Adi93].  Two further access protocols are the proposed
multimedia extensions to SQL, and the Document Filing and
Retrieval protocol.  Neither of these are likely to have
major significance for networked multimedia information
systems.

Other standards of importance include:

  MIME, a multimedia email standard which defines a range
  of media types and encoding methods for those types
  which are useful in a wider context.
  
  AVIs (Audio-Visual Interactive services) and the
  associated multimedia scripting language SMSL, which
  form a standardisation initiative within CCITT (now ITU-
  TSS) to specify interactive multimedia services which
  can be provided across telephone/ISDN networks.
  
There are two important trade associations which are
involved in standardisation work.  The Interactive
Multimedia Association (IMA) has a Compatibility Project
which is developing a specification for platform-
independent interactive multimedia systems, including
networking aspects.  A newly-formed group, the Multimedia
Communications Forum (MMCF), plans to provide input to
the standards bodies.  It is recommended that RARE become
an Observing Member of the MMCF.  A third trade
association - the Multimedia Communications Community of
Interest - has also just been formed.

Future Directions

Three common design approaches emerge from the variety of
systems and standards analysed in this report.  They can
be described in terms of distinctions between different
aspects of the system:

  content is distinct from hyperstructure
  
  media type is distinct from media encoding
  
  data is distinct from protocol
  
Distributed hypermedia systems are emerging from the
research/development phase into the experimental
deployment phase.  However, the existing global
information systems (Gopher, WAIS and WWW) are still
largely limited to the use of external viewers for non-
textual data.  The most significant mismatches between
the capabilities of currently-deployed systems and user
requirements are in the areas of presentation and quality
of service (ie responsiveness).

Improving QOS is significantly more difficult than
improving presentation capabilities, but there are a
number of possible ways in which this could be addressed.
Improving feedback to the user, greater multi-threading
of applications, pre-fetching, caching, the use of
alternative "views" of a node, and the use of isochronous
data streams are all avenues which are worth exploring.

In order to address these problems, it is recommended
that RARE seek to adapt and enhance existing tools,
rather than develop new ones.  In particular, it is
recommended that RARE select the World-Wide Web to
concentrate its efforts on.  The reasons for this choice
revolve around the flexibility of the WWW design, the
availability of hyperlinks, the existing effort which is
already going into multimedia support in WWW, the fact
that it is an integrating solution incorporating both
WAIS and Gopher support, and its high rate of growth
compared to Gopher (despite Gopher's wider deployment).
Gopher is the main competitor to WWW, but its inflexibly
hierarchical structure and the absence of hyperlinks make
it difficult to use for highly-interactive multimedia
applications.

It is recommended that RARE should invite proposals for
and subsequently commission work to:

  Develop conversion tools from commercial multimedia
  authoring packages to WWW, and accompanying authoring
  guidelines.
  
  Implement and evaluate the most promising ways of
  overcoming the QOS problem.
  
  Implement a specific user project using these tools, to
  validate that the facilities being developed are truly
  relevant to real applications.
  
  Use the experience gained to inform and influence the
  development of the WWW technology.
  
  Contribute to the development of PC/MS Windows and
  Apple Macintosh WWW clients, particularly in the
  multimedia data handling area.
  
It is noted that the rapid growth of WWW may in the
future lead to problems through the implementation of
multiple, uncoordinated and mutually incompatible add-on
features.  To guard against this trend, it may be
appropriate for RARE, in coordination with CERN and other
interested parties such as NCSA, to:

  Encourage the formation of a consortium to coordinate
  WWW technical development.
  
